* **[General information](#General%20information)**
* **[Tool consolidation](1.%20Introduction.md#Tool%20consolidation)**
* **[Root Cause Determination](1.%20Introduction.md#Root%20Cause%20Determination)**
* **[Extending Dynatrace](1.%20Introduction.md#Extending%20Dynatrace)**
---
## General information
**[Dynatrace](https://docs.dynatrace.com/docs/discover-dynatrace/what-is-dynatrace)** offers **application observability**, this is not just a monitoring tool.
The essence of application observability — it’s the ability to understand an **application health**, **performance**, and **behavior** from inside out.

Dynatrace → **Software as a Service** (SaaS) platform.
It does all its processing on a dedicated server; users can access all data through a browser.
## The Dynatrace Platform
Dynatrace is an **observability platform** to analyse, automate, and innovate with the power of AI.
It helps you prevent problems, automate workflows, and deliver better, more secure software faster.
- **Observability**
	  Real-time monitoring and visualisation of application performance & infrastructure.
- **Security**
	  Enterprise-grade data privacy and compliance management.
- **Automation**
	  Automated discovery and analysis using AI-driven insights.
- **Integration**
	  Supports various cloud, container, and technology integrations.
Dynatrace helps organisations predict, prevent, and resolve issues before they impact customers, driving better business outcomes.
## Tool consolidation
Dynatrace brings all those monitoring capabilities into a **single**, **unified** **platform**
* **Fewer tools** mean **reduced complexity** and lower operational overhead.
* Teams can **focus on** more **enhancing performance** and user experience.
* **Licensing**, **maintenance**, and setup **efforts are minimised** with a single solution.
## Root Cause Determination
Dynatrace doesn't just alert us to a problem, **it shows us the root cause**. By finding the why behind performance issues, Dynatrace helps us move quickly, stay confident, and keep things running smoothly.
## Extending Dynatrace
  
> [!question] Why Extend Dynatrace?
> Isn’t it already collecting tons of data? Well, yes, and that is exactly why.

> Think of Dynatrace like a smartphone. Right out of the box, it can do a lot, text, take photos, browse the internet. But you probably still install apps and add accessories to make it better fit your lifestyle.
> It’s the same with Dynatrace. The core platform gives you a lot: it collects real user data, metrics, logs, traces, and so on. But not every customer uses the same technologies or needs the same level of detail.

That’s why **not everything is enabled** or added **by default**. Activating everything means **we could be collecting unnecessary data** or have apps and features that clutter what we really find important.
So instead, Dynatrace lets you turn on what you need when you need it, and this is where the **[Dynatrace Hub](2.%20Data%20Collection.md#Dynatrace%20Hub)** comes in.
#### Dynatrace Extensions
Dynatrace can be extended with **Apps Extensions**, **[Cloud Integrations](2.%20Data%20Collection.md#Cloud%20Integrations)**, **[OpenTelemetry](2.%20Data%20Collection.md#[OpenTelemetry](https%20//docs.dynatrace.com/docs/ingest-from/opentelemetry)%20&%20[OneAgent%20SDK](https%20//docs.dynatrace.com/docs/ingest-from/extend-dynatrace/extend-tracing/oneagent-sdk))**, SDKs, **[Workflows ©](5.%20Data%20Visualisation.md#[Workflows](https%20//docs.dynatrace.com/docs/analyze-explore-automate/workflows)%20©)**, and **[APIs](2.%20Data%20Collection.md#Dynatrace%20API)**.

Extensions let you collect extra data for technologies not configured **by default**:
* **[Workflows ©](5.%20Data%20Visualisation.md#[Workflows](https%20//docs.dynatrace.com/docs/analyze-explore-automate/workflows)%20©)**, and **[APIs](2.%20Data%20Collection.md#Dynatrace%20API)**. help automate tasks and integrate with external systems.  
* **[Log Ingestion](2.%20Data%20Collection.md#[Log%20Ingestion](https%20//docs.dynatrace.com/docs/analyze-explore-automate/logs/lma-log-ingestion),%20Masking,%20and%20Access)** and **[Business Events](2.%20Data%20Collection.md#[Business%20Events](https%20//docs.dynatrace.com/docs/discover-dynatrace/references/semantic-dictionary/model/business-analytics))** give you flexible control over additional data that’s collected.  
* **[Application Security](4.%20Exploring%20Problems.md#[Application%20Security](https%20//docs.dynatrace.com/docs/secure/application-security))** helps protect your code in real time.  
* **[Kubernetes](2.%20Data%20Collection.md#[Kubernetes](https%20//www.dynatrace.com/technologies/kubernetes-monitoring))** monitoring is handled by the Dynatrace Operator.
---