* **[Problems ©](4.%20Exploring%20Problems.md#Problems%20©)**
* **[Anomaly Detection ©](4.%20Exploring%20Problems.md#[Anomaly%20Detection](https%20//docs.dynatrace.com/docs/discover-dynatrace/platform/davis-ai/anomaly-detection/adjust-sensitivity-anomaly-detection)%20©)**
* **[Root Cause Analysis](4.%20Exploring%20Problems.md#[Root%20Cause%20Analysis](https%20//docs.dynatrace.com/docs/discover-dynatrace/platform/davis-ai/root-cause-analysis))**
* **[Davis AI and Problem Settings](4.%20Exploring%20Problems.md#[Davis%20AI](https%20//docs.dynatrace.com/docs/discover-dynatrace/platform/davis-ai)%20and%20Problem%20Settings)**
* **[Application Security](4.%20Exploring%20Problems.md#[Application%20Security](https%20//docs.dynatrace.com/docs/secure/application-security))**
---
## Problems ©
> Availability, Error, Slowdown, Resource, Custom

NOT Memory Saturation
## [Anomaly Detection](https://docs.dynatrace.com/docs/discover-dynatrace/platform/davis-ai/anomaly-detection/adjust-sensitivity-anomaly-detection) ©
an anomaly is when a metric breaches a defined threshold, meaning something is no longer behaving as expected.
> By default, a metric must exceed the **50% baseline** for Dynatrace to detect an anomaly.

Once an anomaly is detected, Dynatrace either creates a new problem or attaches the anomaly to an already existing problem.

- **Static thresholds**
    Waits until the condition is met. Doesn’t immediately trigger a problem, but waits to confirm that the condition persists, usually around 5 minutes.
- **Auto-adaptive thresholds** (baselines)  
    are established after two hours of monitoring, but get smarter over time, refining daily. Typically forms after about a week.
    Single deviation might be ignored, but persistent anomalies are detected and Dynatrace flags it as a problem.
## [Root Cause Analysis](https://docs.dynatrace.com/docs/discover-dynatrace/platform/davis-ai/root-cause-analysis)
Groups related anomalies into a single issue. It uses topology mapping to understand how systems connect. This allows it to group related anomalies **into a single problem**.
- **Failure Analysis**  
    Helps pinpoint spikes in application errors.
- **Response time Hotspots**  
    Highlights services or methods causing slowdowns.
- **Distributed Traces**  
    Breaks down requests to see where delays occur.
- **Business Impact Analysis**  
    Shows which users were impacted and how.

## [Davis AI](https://docs.dynatrace.com/docs/discover-dynatrace/platform/davis-ai) and Problem Settings
Davis is the AI engine inside Dynatrace and has the following categories:
* **Casual Correlation Analysis**
	- Detects anomalies.
	- Determines root causes.
	- Groups related problems together.
	- Understands system topology.
* **Davis Seasonal Baseline**
	- Creates auto-adaptive thresholds.
	- Learns seasonal behavior of application metrics.
* **Forecast Analysis**
	* Used in dashboards and notebooks to predict future values for a given metric.
* **Anomaly Detection Settings**
	* Fine-tune when and how anomalies are triggered.
	* These can be set globally or per entity.
* **Alerting Profiles**
	* Control of what types of problems trigger notifications.
* **Problem Notifications**
	* Configure how alerts are sent, by email, Slack, PagerDuty, or other channels.

## [Application Security](https://docs.dynatrace.com/docs/secure/application-security)
Dynatrace can analyse application code at runtime to **detect vulnerabilities**.
It doesn’t just scan the code like a static tool; it watches the code while it’s running.
> Dynatrace knows what code is actually being used and can alert if any 3rd party libraries have vulnerabilities.
* **Runtime Vulnerability Analytics**
  This flags known vulnerabilities in third-party libraries or frameworks.
* **Runtime Application Protection**
   This blocks real-time attacks, like SQL injections or DDoS attempts.
   
Dynatrace also gives each vulnerability a DSS or Davis Security Score. This is calculated with the help of our partner **[Snyk](https://snyk.io/)**, and Davis’s understanding of the environment’s topology. This helps teams prioritise critical issues that are most important, or ones affecting a high number of processes.